Biden’s pick to head US environment agency heartens scientists












































































Skip to main content


Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain
            the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in
            Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles
            and JavaScript.





Advertisement























View all journals




Search




My Account


Login













Explore content




About the journal




Publish with us






Subscribe







Sign up for alerts




RSS feed










nature



news




article













NEWS
18 December 2020

Biden’s pick to head US environment agency heartens scientists


                    Veteran environmental regulator Michael Regan will lead the Environmental Protection Agency, joining a team of experienced climate appointees.
                




Jeff Tollefson





Jeff Tollefson


View author publications

You can also search for this author in PubMed
 Google Scholar














Share on Twitter
Share on Twitter














Share on Facebook
Share on Facebook














Share via E-Mail
Share via E-Mail


















You have full access to this article via your institution.


Download PDF
















Michael Regan will be the first Black man to lead the Environmental Protection Agency.Credit: N. C. Department of Environmental Quality


US president-elect Joe Biden has nominated Michael Regan, North Carolina’s top environmental regulator, to lead the country’s Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) — and scientists and environmentalists are optimistic.Regan, who will now need to be confirmed by the US Senate, joins other experienced appointees whom Biden has tasked with implementing his historic climate agenda. These include an envoy who will handle international climate negotiations and a coordinator to ensure that goals are achieved at home.

Can Joe Biden make good on his revolutionary climate agenda?
“This shows the Biden team is really going to follow through on the bold climate commitments they put forward,” says Leah Stokes, a climate-policy researcher at the University of California, Santa Barbara. It’s a massive political shift, she says, “and it puts the country on track to make climate change the centre of our economic policy”.Regan spent more than nine years working in the EPA’s air-quality programme under former presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush, and another eight years at the Environmental Defense Fund, an advocacy group based in New York City. For the past four, he has led the North Carolina Department of Environmental Quality, where he earned the support of many environmentalists by standing up to chemical and energy companies.“Climate change is the most significant challenge humanity faces. We’ll make meaningful progress together by listening to every voice — from our youth & frontline communities to scientists & our workforce. I will be honored to be part of that work as EPA Administrator,” said Regan on Twitter on 18 December.Rebuilding the EPAIf confirmed, Regan will inherit an agency demoralized by four years under President Donald Trump. The Trump administration sidelined scientists at the agency and disregarded scientific evidence in an unprecedented effort to scale back environmental and public-health protections. Current and former EPA staff recently told Nature about their hopes that Biden can turn things around, although they also highlighted some big challenges he’ll face in doing so.

Science under siege: behind the scenes at Trump’s troubled environment agency
Regan has experience with such situations. When he joined North Carolina’s Department of Environmental Quality in 2017, under newly elected Democratic governor Roy Cooper, staff felt undermined by the previous Republican governor’s industry-friendly policies, says Jeremy Symons, an environmental consultant in Arlington, Virginia, who worked with Regan at the Environmental Defense Fund. Regan was able to rebuild the agency and improve the state’s processes for chemical regulation and disposal of residual coal-ash waste from coal-fired power plants, says Symons.“Michael Regan will be exactly the kind of administrator that the EPA needs to fix the damage that was done under four years of Trump and tackle the climate and health crisis facing Americans,” he adds.The Environmental Protection Network in Washington DC, an organization formed by EPA alumni to speak out against Trump’s undermining of the agency, also endorses Regan’s appointment. Michael Regan “has the background and experience to tackle ongoing threats to people’s health and the environment, profound challenges of #climatechange and systemic environmental injustice”, the group posted on Twitter on 17 December.Environmental justiceRegan is expected to put new emphasis on environmental justice, to protect poor and under-represented communities that are disproportionately impacted by pollution and climate change. In North Carolina, he created the state's first Environmental Justice and Equity Advisory Board to address these issues. Biden put emphasis on environmental justice during his campaign for president, promising to invest 40% of his US$2-trillion climate plan in disadvantaged communities.Regan “has the experience, understands the challenges faced by environmental-justice communities, and has demonstrated a commitment to addressing them”, said Peggy Shepard in an e-mail to Nature. Shepard is co-founder and executive director of WE ACT for Environmental Justice, an advocacy group based in New York.Climate cabinetAt the EPA, one of Regan’s jobs will be to craft regulations to limit greenhouse-gas emissions from vehicles and industry — an effort that is intended to sit at the heart of Biden’s strategy to mitigate climate change. But Biden’s climate agenda is broad: he has committed to ramping up clean energy production, expanding low-carbon infrastructure and reaching zero greenhouse-gas emissions from the power sector by 2035. Meeting those goals will require action across the federal government, and Biden is already assembling a team of high-profile climate appointees to advance that effort.

Can Joe Biden rebuild the ravaged US Environmental Protection Agency?
On the international front, former secretary of state John Kerry will serve as climate envoy, leading the administration’s effort to reintegrate the country into the Paris climate agreement. Biden has also appointed Gina McCarthy, a staunch environmentalist and former EPA head, as his US climate czar. In this position, McCarthy, who helped implement former president Barack Obama’s climate agenda, will coordinate climate action across all federal agencies. Neither of these team members need to be confirmed by the Senate.These and other appointments signal that Biden is gearing up for action on all fronts, says Symons, who is part of the Climate 21 Project, an independent group of academics, policy specialists and former government officials that has crafted a blueprint for federal climate action. “What we were looking for is a White House structure that could rapidly mobilize the entire government to act on climate change,” he says, and so far, “there’s no question that president-elect Biden is exceeding our expectations.”To read more about Biden's picks for science agency heads and advisers, see Nature’s updated guide.
EPA leader

The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) safeguards public health and the environment by assessing and regulating the risks posed by chemicals and pollutants. It has a large role in climate-change mitigation by crafting rules that limit greenhouse-gas emissions.







Credit: left, Joshua Roberts/Getty; right, Al Drago/Bloomberg via Getty






Environmental Protection Agency




People
Incoming: Michael Regan
Outgoing: Andrew Wheeler




Qualifications
Regan spent more than nine years working in the EPA’s air-quality programme under former presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush, and then eight more at the Environmental Defense Fund, an advocacy group based in New York City. For the past four years, he has led the North Carolina Department of Environmental Quality.
Trained as an attorney, Wheeler spent four years in the EPA’s Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics under former presidents George H. W. Bush and Bill Clinton, as well as more than a decade working for Senate Republicans on environmental policy.


Known for
In North Carolina, Regan established his department’s first environmental-justice advisory board while advancing chemical regulation and the remediation of sites contaminated with residual coal ash from power plants.
Wheeler has overseen an aggressive effort to roll back environmental rules established under former president Barack Obama; overhaul or eliminate science advisory panels; and alter how the EPA uses scientific evidence, making it harder for the agency to rely on mainstream public-health research to issue regulations.


Tenure
Announced on 17 December 2020; confirmed on 10 March 2021.
February 2019–January 2021.










doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-020-03621-6


Related Articles





                        
                        Can Joe Biden rebuild the ravaged US Environmental Protection Agency?
                    






                        
                        How to rebuild the US Environmental Protection Agency
                    






                        
                        Science under siege: behind the scenes at Trump’s troubled environment agency
                    






                        
                        Can Joe Biden make good on his revolutionary climate agenda?
                    



Subjects


Politics


Policy


Government


Energy


Environmental sciences


Climate change




Latest on:


Politics





All aboard the climate train! Scientists join activists for COP26 trip
News 02 NOV 21





Top climate scientists are sceptical that nations will rein in global warming
News Feature 01 NOV 21





UK research funding to grow slower than hoped
News 28 OCT 21






Policy





The African Academy of Sciences is in crisis — responsibility must be shared
Editorial 03 NOV 21





Glass is the hidden gem in a carbon-neutral future
Editorial 03 NOV 21





Top climate scientists are sceptical that nations will rein in global warming
News Feature 01 NOV 21






Government





Scientists say Australian plan to cull up to 10,000 wild horses doesn’t go far enough
News 01 NOV 21





How climate coverage can drive change
News 01 NOV 21





Scientists’ fears of racial bias surge amid US crackdown on China ties
News 29 OCT 21

















                Jobs
                







                                Postdoctoral Researcher
                            


John Innes Centre (JIC)
Norwich, United Kingdom





                                PhD student in Cancer gut Microbiome
                            


Luxembourg Institute of Health (LIH)
Esch sur Alzette, Luxembourg





                                Assistant Professor (Tenure-Track), Department of Microbiology joint with Laboratory Medicine and Pathology
                            


University of Washington Department of Microbiology
Seattle, United States





                                Assistant Professor - Open Field
                            


Arizona State University (ASU)
Tempe, AZ, United States










You have full access to this article via your institution.


Download PDF








Related Articles





                        
                        Can Joe Biden rebuild the ravaged US Environmental Protection Agency?
                    






                        
                        How to rebuild the US Environmental Protection Agency
                    






                        
                        Science under siege: behind the scenes at Trump’s troubled environment agency
                    






                        
                        Can Joe Biden make good on his revolutionary climate agenda?
                    



Subjects


Politics


Policy


Government


Energy


Environmental sciences


Climate change












Sign up to Nature Briefing
An essential round-up of science news, opinion and analysis, delivered to your inbox every weekday.




Email address



Yes! Sign me up to receive the daily Nature Briefing email. I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy.

Sign up



















Close banner






Close






Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily.





Email address


Sign up



I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy.











Close banner






Close



Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox.
Sign up for Nature Briefing
            









Explore content



                                    Research articles
                                



                                    News
                                



                                    Opinion
                                



                                    Research Analysis
                                



                                    Careers
                                



                                    Books & Culture
                                



                                    Podcasts
                                



                                    Videos
                                



                                    Current issue
                                



                                    Browse issues
                                



                                    Collections
                                



                                    Subjects
                                


Follow us on Facebook
                            


Follow us on Twitter
                            



Subscribe



Sign up for alerts




RSS feed







About the journal



                                Journal Staff
                            



                                About the Editors
                            



                                Journal Information
                            



                                Our publishing models
                            



                                Editorial Values Statement
                            



                                Awards
                            



                                Journal Impact
                            



                                Contact
                            



                                Editorial policies
                            



                                History of Nature
                            



                                Send a news tip
                            






Publish with us



                                For Authors
                            



                                For Referees
                            


Submit manuscript







Search



Search articles by subject, keyword or author





Show results from

All journals



Search








                    Advanced search
                


Quick links

Explore articles by subject
Find a job
Guide to authors
Editorial policies









                    Nature (Nature)
                

ISSN 1476-4687 (online)
    

ISSN 0028-0836 (print)
    









nature.com sitemap





About us
Press releases
Press office
Contact us





















Discover content

Journals A-Z
Articles by subject
Nano
Protocol Exchange
Nature Index



Publishing policies

Nature portfolio policies
Open access



Author & Researcher services

Reprints & permissions
Research data
Language editing
Scientific editing
Nature Masterclasses
Nature Research Academies



Libraries & institutions

Librarian service & tools
Librarian portal
Open research
Recommend to library



Advertising & partnerships

Advertising
Partnerships & Services
Media kits
Branded content



Career development

Nature Careers
Nature  Conferences
Nature  events



Regional websites

Nature Africa
Nature China
Nature India
Nature Italy
Nature Japan
Nature Korea
Nature Middle East



Legal & Privacy

Privacy Policy
Use of cookies
Manage cookies/Do not sell my data
Legal notice
Accessibility statement
Terms & Conditions
California Privacy Statement










© 2021 Springer Nature Limited