Is lightning striking the Arctic more than ever before?










































































Skip to main content


Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain
            the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in
            Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles
            and JavaScript.





Advertisement























View all journals




Search




My Account


Login













Explore content




About the journal




Publish with us






Subscribe







Sign up for alerts




RSS feed










nature



news




article













NEWS
17 December 2020

Is lightning striking the Arctic more than ever before?


                    Team detects a huge increase and says it could be due to climate change, but others can’t confirm the findings.
                




Alexandra Witze





Alexandra Witze


View author publications

You can also search for this author in PubMed
 Google Scholar














Share on Twitter
Share on Twitter














Share on Facebook
Share on Facebook














Share via E-Mail
Share via E-Mail


















You have full access to this article via your institution.


Download PDF









Download PDF












Lightning typically forms with the aid of warm air, which is why it has historically been rare in the Arctic.Credit: Tommy Eliassen/Science Photo Library


Lightning is striking the Arctic many times more often than it did a decade ago, a study suggests — and the rate could soon double. The findings demonstrate yet another way Earth’s climate could be changing as the planet warms, although not all researchers agree that the trend is real.Robert Holzworth, an atmospheric physicist at the University of Washington in Seattle and leader of the study, defends the findings. “We’re seeing a symptom of global climate change,” he says. Holzworth is director of the World Wide Lightning Location Network (WWLLN), the collection of ground-based sensors that measured the data. He reported the results on 8 December at a virtual meeting of the American Geophysical Union (and published them before peer review as a preprint1).

The Arctic is burning like never before — and that’s bad news for climate change
Another lightning-detection network, whose records do not extend as far back as those Holzworth studied, does not find the same increase.Whether or not lightning is increasing in the Arctic could have a significant impact on the region. The past two years have set records for the largest area of land burnt by wildfires — some of them ignited by lightning — and the most carbon dioxide emitted in the Arctic since records began. More lightning would mean even more chances that wildfires will start, which could in turn put even more climate-altering soot and gases into the air.Polar lightningLightning forms when ice crystals inside convecting storm clouds — those filled with roiling air currents fed by warm air — collide and transfer electrical charge. A charge separation builds up until it hits a threshold, and a lightning stroke is released. Some researchers have predicted that global warming will lead to more convective storms and lightning worldwide as air and ocean temperatures rise2. However, some modelling studies suggest the opposite3.Nonetheless, the World Meteorological Organization in Geneva, Switzerland, added lightning to its list of ‘essential climate variables’ in 2016, meaning that observations of lightning could help researchers to track the changing global climate.






Source: Robert Holzworth/University of Washington


The Arctic is warming faster than the rest of the planet, so changes in lightning might be most apparent there. August 2019 saw the most northerly stroke ever detected — just 52 kilometres from the North Pole — according to the Finnish company Vaisala, headquartered in Vantaa, which runs a lightning-detection network. And a July 2014 storm over the Canadian Arctic caused more than 15,000 lightning strokes north of the Arctic Circle4.Lightning in the Arctic is normally rare, accounting for around 0.5% of all global strokes detected by the WWLLN. But Holzworth and his colleagues found that the number of annual summertime lightning strokes above a latitude of 65° N rose from around 35,000 in 2010 to nearly 250,000 this year (see ‘Arctic lightning rising’). The scientists studied the months of June, July and August, when nearly all Arctic lightning occurs. They found increasing numbers of lightning strokes across the Arctic, with most of the activity happening around northern Siberia.Verifying a trendTracking trends in lightning can be difficult because detection networks grow more efficient over time, as advanced sensors are added. So Holzworth and his colleagues ran several analyses to confirm that there was more Arctic lightning happening, not just more being detected. “There’s no question about it,” he says.

Scientists probe lightning hotspot to predict future strikes
Vaisala’s network has not recorded the same trend. Its data go back only to 2012, rather than to 2010. But “we don’t see an unambiguous trend toward more lightning at more extreme latitudes”, says Ryan Said, a meteorologist and lightning analyst in Vaisala’s office in Louisville, Colorado.In places that see relatively little lightning, such as the Arctic, just a couple of intense thunderstorms can cause a proportionally huge rise in the total number of lightning strokes detected in a given year, Said notes. With so much year-to-year variability, it can be hard to isolate long-term trends.Some researchers in the community say Holzworth’s findings make sense. The work “supports the wider view of a lightning-richer future for the Arctic”, says Sander Veraverbeke, an Earth-systems scientist at the Free University of Amsterdam. In 2017, Veraverbeke and his colleagues reported that lightning was igniting more wildfires, farther north, than in the past in parts of Alaska and Canada5.

Arctic sea ice hits second-lowest level on record
One way to verify Holzworth’s work would be to survey Indigenous and other communities living at high latitudes, says Jessica McCarty, a geographer at Miami University in Oxford, Ohio, who studies Arctic wildfire.Another way is to follow up with further lightning-detection studies. Holzworth’s work shows “an interesting correlation” with changes in global temperature, says Antti Mäkelä, a lightning specialist at the Finnish Meteorological Institute in Helsinki. By next year, Mäkelä and his colleagues will have 20 years of data from a lightning-detection system that spans Norway, Sweden, Finland and Estonia6 — and they plan to analyse the data set to see whether there has been an increase in lightning in northern Scandinavia.

Nature 589, 11-12 (2021)
doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-020-03561-1

References1.Holzworth, R. H. et al. Preprint at ESSOAr https://doi.org/10.1002/essoar.10504658.1 (2020).2.Price, C. & Rind, D. J. Geophys. Res. 99, 10823–10831 (1994).Article 
    
                    Google Scholar 
                3.Finney, D. L. et al. Nature Clim. Change 8, 210–213 (2018).Article 
    
                    Google Scholar 
                4.Brown, D. M., Kochtubajda, B. & Said, R. K. Atmos.–Ocean 58, 231–242 (2020).Article 
    
                    Google Scholar 
                5.Veraverbeke, S. et al. Nature Clim. Change 7, 529-534 (2017).Article 
    
                    Google Scholar 
                6.Mäkelä, A., Enno, S.-E. & Haapalainen, J. Atmos. Res. 139, 46–61 (2014).Article 
    
                    Google Scholar 
                Download references

Related Articles





                        
                        The Arctic is burning like never before — and that’s bad news for climate change
                    






                        
                        Scientists probe lightning hotspot to predict future strikes
                    






                        
                        Arctic sea ice hits second-lowest level on record
                    



Subjects


Climate change


Atmospheric science




Latest on:


Climate change





Glass is the hidden gem in a carbon-neutral future
Editorial 03 NOV 21





Episodic deluges in simulated hothouse climates
Article 03 NOV 21




There is no silver bullet against climate change
Correspondence 02 NOV 21






Atmospheric science





Direct radiative effects of airborne microplastics
Article 20 OCT 21





Day–night cloud asymmetry prevents early oceans on Venus but not on Earth
Article 13 OCT 21





From the archive
News & Views 05 OCT 21

















                Jobs
                







                                Postdoctoral Researcher
                            


John Innes Centre (JIC)
Norwich, United Kingdom





                                PhD student in Cancer gut Microbiome
                            


Luxembourg Institute of Health (LIH)
Esch sur Alzette, Luxembourg





                                Assistant Professor (Tenure-Track), Department of Microbiology joint with Laboratory Medicine and Pathology
                            


University of Washington Department of Microbiology
Seattle, United States





                                Assistant Professor - Open Field
                            


Arizona State University (ASU)
Tempe, AZ, United States










You have full access to this article via your institution.


Download PDF









Download PDF




Related Articles





                        
                        The Arctic is burning like never before — and that’s bad news for climate change
                    






                        
                        Scientists probe lightning hotspot to predict future strikes
                    






                        
                        Arctic sea ice hits second-lowest level on record
                    



Subjects


Climate change


Atmospheric science












Sign up to Nature Briefing
An essential round-up of science news, opinion and analysis, delivered to your inbox every weekday.




Email address



Yes! Sign me up to receive the daily Nature Briefing email. I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy.

Sign up



















Close banner






Close






Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily.





Email address


Sign up



I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy.











Close banner






Close



Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox.
Sign up for Nature Briefing
            









Explore content



                                    Research articles
                                



                                    News
                                



                                    Opinion
                                



                                    Research Analysis
                                



                                    Careers
                                



                                    Books & Culture
                                



                                    Podcasts
                                



                                    Videos
                                



                                    Current issue
                                



                                    Browse issues
                                



                                    Collections
                                



                                    Subjects
                                


Follow us on Facebook
                            


Follow us on Twitter
                            



Subscribe



Sign up for alerts




RSS feed







About the journal



                                Journal Staff
                            



                                About the Editors
                            



                                Journal Information
                            



                                Our publishing models
                            



                                Editorial Values Statement
                            



                                Awards
                            



                                Journal Impact
                            



                                Contact
                            



                                Editorial policies
                            



                                History of Nature
                            



                                Send a news tip
                            






Publish with us



                                For Authors
                            



                                For Referees
                            


Submit manuscript







Search



Search articles by subject, keyword or author





Show results from

All journals



Search








                    Advanced search
                


Quick links

Explore articles by subject
Find a job
Guide to authors
Editorial policies









                    Nature (Nature)
                

ISSN 1476-4687 (online)
    

ISSN 0028-0836 (print)
    









nature.com sitemap





About us
Press releases
Press office
Contact us





















Discover content

Journals A-Z
Articles by subject
Nano
Protocol Exchange
Nature Index



Publishing policies

Nature portfolio policies
Open access



Author & Researcher services

Reprints & permissions
Research data
Language editing
Scientific editing
Nature Masterclasses
Nature Research Academies



Libraries & institutions

Librarian service & tools
Librarian portal
Open research
Recommend to library



Advertising & partnerships

Advertising
Partnerships & Services
Media kits
Branded content



Career development

Nature Careers
Nature  Conferences
Nature  events



Regional websites

Nature Africa
Nature China
Nature India
Nature Italy
Nature Japan
Nature Korea
Nature Middle East



Legal & Privacy

Privacy Policy
Use of cookies
Manage cookies/Do not sell my data
Legal notice
Accessibility statement
Terms & Conditions
California Privacy Statement










© 2021 Springer Nature Limited