Moderna COVID vaccine becomes second to get US authorization










































































Skip to main content


Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain
            the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in
            Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles
            and JavaScript.





Advertisement























View all journals




Search




My Account


Login













Explore content




About the journal




Publish with us






Subscribe







Sign up for alerts




RSS feed










nature



news




article













NEWS
18 December 2020
Update 19 December 2020

Moderna COVID vaccine becomes second to get US authorization


                    Two RNA vaccines will be useful as US infections surge, but the speedy authorizations complicate clinical trials.
                




Heidi Ledford





Heidi Ledford


View author publications

You can also search for this author in PubMed
 Google Scholar














Share on Twitter
Share on Twitter














Share on Facebook
Share on Facebook














Share via E-Mail
Share via E-Mail


















You have full access to this article via your institution.


Download PDF
















Moderna’s vaccine is the second to be recommended for emergency-use authorization in the United States.Credit: Paul Hennessy/NurPhoto/Getty


A week after granting an emergency-use authorization for the country’s first COVID-19 vaccine, US regulators have followed with a second: another RNA vaccine, this one made by Moderna of Cambridge, Massachusetts.The emergency-use authorization followed quickly after a panel of external advisers to the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) voted unanimously, with one abstention, to recommend use of the vaccine on 17 December. One week earlier, the agency authorized a similar vaccine made by Pfizer of New York City and BioNTech of Mainz, Germany, about a week after UK regulatory authorities did the same.

US authorization of first COVID vaccine marks new phase in safety monitoring
The speed of these authorizations reflects the urgency of the pandemic, and is a testament to the scientific advances that made rapid vaccine development possible, said immunologist James Hildreth, president of Meharry Medical College in Nashville, Tennessee, at the panel meeting on Thursday. “To go from having a sequence of a virus in January to having two vaccines available in December is a remarkable achievement.” The authorization is a first for Moderna, a ten-year-old biotechnology company that had long pledged to revolutionize medicine by harnessing RNA as a therapeutic agent, but had yet to push a drug or vaccine all the way through to the clinic. It will join a growing list of organizations with coronavirus vaccines that are being deployed around the world, including teams in China and Russia. In the United States, the vaccines offer a glimmer of hope amid the prospect of a tough winter. The country is logging thousands of deaths from COVID-19 each day, and this is expected to rise over the winter holiday season. Coronavirus infections are so rampant that Moderna was able to reach the primary endpoint of its trial five months earlier than expected, said Jacqueline Miller, senior vice-president and head of infectious diseases at the company.RNA vaccineModerna’s vaccine, which was developed in collaboration with the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, works in the same way as the one produced by Pfizer and BioNTech. Both consist of RNA molecules encased in lipid nanoparticles. The RNA in both vaccines encodes a slightly modified form of the SARS-CoV-2 protein known as spike, which enables the virus to infect human cells.Once taken up by cells, the RNA is used to produce the protein, which then triggers an immune response. The RNA does not enter the nucleus where the cell’s genome resides, and is degraded by the cell within a day of the injection.

COVID vaccine excitement builds as Moderna reports third positive result
Like Pfizer’s vaccine, Moderna’s seems to be highly effective — about 94% — at preventing symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections. Its safety profile is also similar to Pfizer’s, with fatigue, headaches and pain at the site of injection among the most often cited side effects.Since the Pfizer vaccine was rolled out in the United Kingdom and the United States, there have been occasional reports of recipients experiencing severe allergic reactions called anaphylaxis after being injected. There have been no signs of such reactions so far in the Moderna trial, which excluded people who have had anaphylactic reactions to previous vaccines, but not those with other allergies, such as reactions to food.The two vaccines differ in the composition of the lipid nanoparticle that encases the RNA, and Moderna’s formulation allows the vaccine to be stored at higher temperature than Pfizer’s, which must be kept at −70 °C, much colder than a normal freezer. Moderna’s vaccine can be stored in a −20 °C freezer for 6 months, and in a refrigerator (at about 4 °C) for 30 days. This promises to streamline the logistics of deploying the vaccine, particularly in rural areas and in countries with limited health-care infrastructure.Continuing trialsFDA advisers spent much of the 17 December committee meeting discussing when and how to offer a vaccine to participants in the placebo arm of Moderna’s trial after an emergency-use authorization is granted. Once a coronavirus vaccine becomes available, participants might choose to leave the trial to guarantee that they can get a jab. Maintaining the integrity of clinical trials after vaccine authorization — to collect data on long-term safety and the duration of protection — is a looming challenge for developers.Last week, Pfizer proposed that when its participants become eligible to receive a vaccine as part of a national roll-out, study investigators will tell them whether they received the vaccine or a placebo. Moderna has instead proposed to ‘unblind’ its whole trial at once after it receives an emergency-use authorization, telling all of its participants which treatment they have received, and offering to vaccinate those in the placebo arm using doses that had already been set aside for the clinical trial.

Why emergency COVID-19 vaccine approvals pose a dilemma for scientists: 
Some FDA advisers cautioned that this approach would sacrifice valuable weeks of data collection, and allow some participants to receive the vaccine ahead of others in similar priority groups in their communities. Others argued that although the approach is not ideal, it might be necessary given the complexity of the vaccine roll-out in the United States, where individual state and local governments will set their own priorities. “It’s such a hodgepodge here, it’s impractical,” said biostatistician Jeannette Lee at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences in Little Rock.Offering trial participants the vaccine could help the company keep them enrolled in the study, so that it can continue to collect data about safety and immunity, said Lindsey Baden, an infectious disease specialist at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, Massachusetts, who was asked by Moderna to speak about the issue to the committee. Some healthcare workers who participated in the trial were already leaving to get the Pfizer vaccine, he said. “If we lose our volunteers the opportunity to learn anything further will be substantially impaired,” he said. “We have to be practical.”

doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-020-03593-7

Updates & Corrections

Update 19 December 2020: This story was updated to reflect that the US Food and Drug Administration issued an emergency-use authorization for the Moderna vaccine.





Related Articles





                        
                        US authorization of first COVID vaccine marks new phase in safety monitoring
                    






                        
                        The UK has approved a COVID vaccine — here’s what scientists now want to know
                    






                        
                        COVID vaccine excitement builds as Moderna reports third positive result
                    






                        
                        What Pfizer’s landmark COVID vaccine results mean for the pandemic
                    






                        
                        Why emergency COVID-19 vaccine approvals pose a dilemma for scientists:
                    






                        
                        Moderna: The billion-dollar biotech
                    



Subjects


Medical research


Infection


Vaccines


SARS-CoV-2




Latest on:


Medical research





African scientists race to test COVID drugs — but face major hurdles
News Feature 03 NOV 21





The search for people who never get COVID
News 29 OCT 21





Common antidepressant slashes risk of COVID death
News 29 OCT 21






Infection





The high burden of infectious disease
Nature Index 27 OCT 21





Uneven attention hampers the drive to control infectious diseases
Nature Index 27 OCT 21





An mRNA vaccine industry in the making
Nature Index 27 OCT 21






Vaccines





An mRNA vaccine industry in the making
Nature Index 27 OCT 21





What COVID vaccines for young kids could mean for the pandemic
News 27 OCT 21





Rhino puzzle and China’s COVID vaccines — the week in infographics
News 22 OCT 21

















                Jobs
                







                                Postdoctoral Researcher
                            


John Innes Centre (JIC)
Norwich, United Kingdom





                                PhD student in Cancer gut Microbiome
                            


Luxembourg Institute of Health (LIH)
Esch sur Alzette, Luxembourg





                                Assistant Professor (Tenure-Track), Department of Microbiology joint with Laboratory Medicine and Pathology
                            


University of Washington Department of Microbiology
Seattle, United States





                                Assistant Professor - Open Field
                            


Arizona State University (ASU)
Tempe, AZ, United States










You have full access to this article via your institution.


Download PDF








Related Articles





                        
                        US authorization of first COVID vaccine marks new phase in safety monitoring
                    






                        
                        The UK has approved a COVID vaccine — here’s what scientists now want to know
                    






                        
                        COVID vaccine excitement builds as Moderna reports third positive result
                    






                        
                        What Pfizer’s landmark COVID vaccine results mean for the pandemic
                    






                        
                        Why emergency COVID-19 vaccine approvals pose a dilemma for scientists:
                    






                        
                        Moderna: The billion-dollar biotech
                    



Subjects


Medical research


Infection


Vaccines


SARS-CoV-2












Sign up to Nature Briefing
An essential round-up of science news, opinion and analysis, delivered to your inbox every weekday.




Email address



Yes! Sign me up to receive the daily Nature Briefing email. I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy.

Sign up



















Close banner






Close






Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily.





Email address


Sign up



I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy.











Close banner






Close



Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox.
Sign up for Nature Briefing
            









Explore content



                                    Research articles
                                



                                    News
                                



                                    Opinion
                                



                                    Research Analysis
                                



                                    Careers
                                



                                    Books & Culture
                                



                                    Podcasts
                                



                                    Videos
                                



                                    Current issue
                                



                                    Browse issues
                                



                                    Collections
                                



                                    Subjects
                                


Follow us on Facebook
                            


Follow us on Twitter
                            



Subscribe



Sign up for alerts




RSS feed







About the journal



                                Journal Staff
                            



                                About the Editors
                            



                                Journal Information
                            



                                Our publishing models
                            



                                Editorial Values Statement
                            



                                Awards
                            



                                Journal Impact
                            



                                Contact
                            



                                Editorial policies
                            



                                History of Nature
                            



                                Send a news tip
                            






Publish with us



                                For Authors
                            



                                For Referees
                            


Submit manuscript







Search



Search articles by subject, keyword or author





Show results from

All journals



Search








                    Advanced search
                


Quick links

Explore articles by subject
Find a job
Guide to authors
Editorial policies









                    Nature (Nature)
                

ISSN 1476-4687 (online)
    

ISSN 0028-0836 (print)
    









nature.com sitemap





About us
Press releases
Press office
Contact us





















Discover content

Journals A-Z
Articles by subject
Nano
Protocol Exchange
Nature Index



Publishing policies

Nature portfolio policies
Open access



Author & Researcher services

Reprints & permissions
Research data
Language editing
Scientific editing
Nature Masterclasses
Nature Research Academies



Libraries & institutions

Librarian service & tools
Librarian portal
Open research
Recommend to library



Advertising & partnerships

Advertising
Partnerships & Services
Media kits
Branded content



Career development

Nature Careers
Nature  Conferences
Nature  events



Regional websites

Nature Africa
Nature China
Nature India
Nature Italy
Nature Japan
Nature Korea
Nature Middle East



Legal & Privacy

Privacy Policy
Use of cookies
Manage cookies/Do not sell my data
Legal notice
Accessibility statement
Terms & Conditions
California Privacy Statement










© 2021 Springer Nature Limited